# Paper by strong writers

- Diggle, Peter, and Søren Lophaven. 2006. "Bayesian Geostatistical Design." *Scandinavian Journal of Statistics* 33 (1): 53–64.

## SUCCES

- Simple
    - The sampling situations, criteria, and conclusions are all simple.
- Unexpected
    - Given the background presented in the paper, the story is not very surprising.
- Concrete
    - The real-world case study ensures clarity.
- Credible
    - Cites previous work and provides logical connection to future work.
- Emotional
    - Not much emothion but it does somewhat engage curiosity for those with some sampling background.
- Stories
    - All the sections have a purpose and fit together into a coherent story.

## Comments

This paper would likely be understandable to anyone comfortable with math and statistics terms.


# Paper by ordinary specialist

- Heller, Martin, Jan Hannig, and Malcolm R Leadbetter. 2015. "Optimal Sample Planning for System State Analysis with Partial Data Collection." *Stat* 4 (1): 69–80.

## SUCCES

- Simple
    - The core ideas are simple and could be understood by a pretty general audience.
- Unexpected
    - The performance of the simple search algorithm is surprising
- Concrete
    - It lacks a real-world example but the motivating context is clear enough.
- Credible
    - It incrementally builds off previous work and is believable.
- Emotional
    - Emotion is entirely missing but the application area has potential.
- Stories
    - The mini narratives are difficult to understand individually and are not adequately linked together.

## Comments

- Technical details and standalone sections in the main body get in the way of the understanding.


# Review paper

- Christman, Mary C. 2000. "A Review of Quadrat-Based Sampling of Rare, Geographically Clustered Populations." *Journal of Agricultural, Biological, and Environmental Statistics*, 168–201.

## SUCCES

- Simple
    - The author's goals and motivation are clearly stated upfront so readers know what story to look for.
- Unexpected
    - The simulation results were somewhat unexpected but not presented as such.
- Concrete
    - I understand the setting because I have extensive relevant background but it would seem abstract to someone without that.
- Credible
    - Each topic reviewed is well-referenced so I believe the author's statements.
- Emotional
    - The author inspires curiosity by pointing out that her area of application is different from where the existing knowledge developed.
- Stories
    - The layout is such that one can get the whole story while knowing which details they don't need and thus which sections they can skip.

## Comments

- I did not expect a review paper to be so effective at storytelling, but this is structured brilliantly.
- The only shortcoming is that the reader needs quite a bit of background, but readers of the journal (JABES) would have it.

